---
layout: post
title: Research - LLVM Code Generation
---
This is a summary document of [LLVM Tutorial - 3. Kaleidoscope: Code generation to LLVM IR](https://llvm.org/docs/tutorial/MyFirstLanguageFrontend/LangImpl03.html) and [inkwell's repository (README and Kaleidoscope example)](https://github.com/TheDan64/inkwell).

Chapters 1 and 2 involve creating a parser and AST, which were both tasks completed through my work with the interpreter.

Note that LLVM's tutorial is based on a demonstration language (Kaleidoscope).
To write this into Rust, I am using [inkwell](https://thedan64.github.io/inkwell/inkwell/index.html).

# Components of Code Generation

Code generation refers to the process of converting an AST into LLVM IR.

They provide 4 static variables to be used during code generation.
```cpp
static LLVMContext TheContext;
static IRBuilder<> Builder(TheContext);
static std::unique_ptr<Module> TheModule;
static std::map<std::string, Value *> NamedValues;
```
* **LLVMContext** (`inkwell::context::Context`): Opaque object that holds LLVM data structures
* **IRBuilder** (`inkwell::builder::Builder`): Helper object that constructs LLVM instructions
* **std::unique_ptr<Module\\>** (`inkwell::module::Module`): Contains functions and global variables
* **std::map<std::string, Value \*>** (`HashMap<String, PointerValue<'ctx>>`): Global variable storage

# Resolving Expressions to IR

- **Number (constant) expression:**
	- C++: `ConstantFP::get(TheContext, APFloat(Val))`
	- `inkwell`: `self.context.f64_type().const_float(f64)`
\[More research is needed for non-float values]

- **Variable expression:**
	- index `NamedValues`
	
- **Binary expression:**
	- C++: `Builder.CreateFAdd`, `---FSub`, `---FMul`, etc.
	- `inkwell`: `builder.build_float_add`, `---sub`, `---mul`, etc.
Left and right operands require same type

\[More research is needed for non-float values]

- **Function call expression:**
	- C++: `TheModule.getFunction(Callee)`
	- `inkwell`: `self.module.get_function(name)`
		- How would you call arbitrary functions?

# Function Expressions
Function type:
	C++: `Function`
	`inkwell`: `inkwell::values::FunctionValue`

In LLVM IR, the function declaration is a prototype (identifier and parameters) with no body. This is created with
- C++: `Function *F = Function::Create(FT, Function::ExternalLinkage, Name, TheModule.get());`
	- `FT`: Type of function parameters
	- `Function::ExternalLinkage`: visibility essentially
- `inkwell`: `self.module.add_function(&ident, fn_type /* FunctionType */, None /* linkage */)`
	- `None` (`inkwell`) == `Function::ExternalLinkage` (C++)

The body can then be included using `BasicBlock::Create(TheContext, "entry", TheFunction)`:

- Create body
	- `inkwell`: `self.context.append_basic_block(function, "entry");`
- Allocate argument variables
- Compile body

# Building
The LLVM IR is not directly runnable. So, we can see fancy IR.
The building and execution of code are `unsafe` and have to be designated as `unsafe`.

In the main `inkwell` example:
```rust
// compilation
unsafe {
    self.execution_engine.get_function("sum").ok()
}

// execution
unsafe {
    sum.call(x, y, z);
}
```